>> My name is Josh and I'll be joined shortly by Jason,
and we're engineers on the iPhone Frameworks Team,
and we're going to spend some time talking
this morning about some new ideas we've had
about handling Multi-Touch events and
gestures over the course of the last year.
We've all had some time now to play around with UITouch
and UIEvent and we've got some new things to talk about
and some different ways that you might be
interested in handling events and gestures.
And so, we'll get into that in a little bit.
We're going to start out with a
bit of a review from last year.
For those of you that were here
the first little bit is going
to cover basically the same thing
that we talked about last year.
For those of you that are new, this will be new
information obviously, but not quite as in-depth.
So feel free to go back and check
out the session from last year.
As soon as we're done with that, we'll start talking
about what's new in iPhone OS 3.0 in UIEvent,
and talk about the new EventTypes and Subtypes, and
Jason will get into more depth about that later on.
And then, we're going to start talking about
this new stuff that I've been referencing here.
And we're going to talk about encapsulating your touch
handling, sort of taking multiple touches and handling them
in separate objects as sort of discrete
gestures, and kind of trying to get away
from the really large complex state machines you might
have to have been building over the last year in order
to handle differentiating between a pinch and a rotation.
We'll talk about ways that you can handle that
And finally, Jason will come up and talk
about some best practices and some Gotchas,
some issues that we've seen people
having over the last year,
and some things that maybe we can
do better in the coming year.
So, start out with a little bit of a review.
What is a Touch Sequence?
So touch starts when a finger comes down on the screen,
continues while the finger is moving and finally ends
when the finger lifts, that's pretty basic.
So what's happening in your application
and what do you get from UKit during this.
Well, when the finger comes down on the
screen, we create a new UITouch object.
And this UITouch object, this same instance, is going to be
used to represent this finger for the entire touch sequence.
So as your finger moves on the screen, we're going to
update this one instance and continue to deliver messages
about that touch using the same touch instance.
The implication there is that you can use the address
of this touch as a unique key to associate data with it.
So if you needed to associate, for
instance, the point at which our touch began,
at the beginning of its touch sequence, the touch
doesn't remember that on its own, but you could associate
that with a particular touch pointer
that you get back in touchesBegan.
So, we've created this new UITouch.
Its phase is Began, and we're going to
update the phase as the finger moves.
And it has a location.
So now user has put their finger down.
We've created this touch.
We'll talk about where this gets delivered in a little
bit, but what happens is we call touchesBegan withEvent
on the target view, and we'll pass in--
this thing will take two parameters.
It will take an NSSet, which is the set of touches that
have began since the last time we told you about touches,
and an event which contains more information about all the
other touches, and we'll talk about that in a minute too.
So as the user moves their finger, we're going to update
the touches phase to Moved, it might have a new location.
Well, obviously if it's moved, it will.
And we'll deliver it with touchesMoved withEvent.
And all of these touch delivery methods are going to
have the same basic parameters they will have an NSSet
of touches, these are just the touches that
have moved, even if there's other touches,
they won't be included in the set
unless they're moving, and the event.
So as the user continues to move their finger,
we'll continue to update the same touch instance,
it will still have the touches moved, UITouch
phase moved in a new location, and again,
we'll call touchesMoved, same things as it happens again.
And finally, when the finger lifts,
we'll update the phase to Ended,
change its location, and call touchesEnded withEvent.
Now that's the basic normal series
of things that happens on a touch.
And one thing that we've seen over the last
year is the feeling that maybe touchesCancelled
which is the fourth member of this set, is optional.
And we'd really like to stress that
actually touchesCancelled is not optional.
If you're implementing touch handling
and you're trying to look
for the entire sequence of a touch, it may not actually end.
It may instead be cancelled at some point.
And there are a few reasons for that.
It can happen if a phone call comes in, if the user
turns off the device while touches are on the screen,
if the user puts down more than five fingers,
we actually end up cancelling all the
touches 'cause we can't track more than that.
So there are actually quite a few
reasons and if you're using scroll views,
you'll have touches being cancelled
inside the scroll view as well.
So if you're implementing touch handling
and not getting touchesEnded called,
make sure that you're checking for touchesCancelled as well.
So we got a little sample of that too.
User's finger comes down, and we create a new
UITouch, its phase is Began, it has a location.
As the user moves their finger, we update
the phase to moved, and the location changes,
but now, we got a call from John Appleseed.
And so we're going to cancel that touch at that
point, we'll set the touches phase to Cancelled
and we'll call touchesCancelled withEvent,
and there are two LLs in that not one.
So make sure you type that one right.
Alright, so UITouch, that's the basic thing
that represents a finger on the screen.
But this is a Multi-Touch device, and there may
be multiple fingers on the screen at any one time.
So we actually have this other object, UIEvent, which
knows about all the touches that are on the screen,
regardless of where they are or what phase they're in.
And that's as we saw just a minute ago
also delivered with all the touches.
So the UIEvent, as I said, knows about all these touches,
and every touch is associated with a particular window,
and the event knows what window
each touch is associated with.
Each touch is also associated with a particular
view, and the event knows that mapping as well.
So you can ask the event for information
about these touches.
You can ask it for all the touches, and it
will give you back the set of all the touches
that are currently active anywhere on the screen,
regardless of what window or view they're in.
You can ask it for all the touches for a particular window,
so all the touches in window A will return
the set of touches that are in Window A.
And finally, you can ask for the touches in a particular
view, which will return for instance, the touches in View A.
[ Pause ]
>> Alright, so with UITouch and UIEvent,
those are the most basic building blocks
on which all other Multi-Touch processing is built.
There is one other class in UIKit that provides
a bit of a higher level view on these things.
If you don't want to deal with UITouch and UIEvent directly,
and all you're looking for is some of the basic types
of information that UIControl might be interested in,
you might be able to use UIControl instead
of having to subclass UIView directly.
UIControl is a subclass of UIView, and it just--
it implements the touch processing methods
and provides this higher level view of events.
So we're not going to cover this too much, but we'll quickly
talk about some of the things that you can ask the control
for information about and you just
register a target action so any object
in your application could be notified
of these particular events.
So you can find out when a touch comes down in that
control, you can find out when it comes down repeatedly,
which is the same as the tap count property on UITouch.
If the user is tapping, you'll get touch down repeat.
You can ask it for information about the user dragging
their finger within and outside of the control.
You can find out when the user is dragging and
they enter or leave the bound of the control,
and you can find out when the finger is
lifted either inside or outside the control.
And finally, you can also find out if touches are cancelled,
because touchesCancelled is actually quite important.
Alright, so those are the basic building
blocks and that's pretty much the full review
of what we covered last year in a
bit of a condensed format there.
So I'm going to do a quick Multi-Touch demo.
For those of you that have checked out the Multi-Touch
sample code on developer.apple.com, this is basically that.
So we're going to go through it pretty quickly.
You can check it out after the show as well, and if you were
here last year, you've probably already seen most of this.
So let's see what we got.
We basically have the Xcode project
template for a new application.
So I've got my Multi-Touch demo application
delegate that you get just right out of the box.
There's really nothing custom in here.
I've got a ViewController that you get,
there's really nothing new here yet either.
And we've just implemented View
DidLoad to call superview DidLoad
and then set the background color of our view to white.
So let's get started.
The first thing that we're going to do is add a little
helper method up here which is going to create our images.
If you saw in that video that we had up there, there
was basically-- we're going to have three images,
and we're going to let the user drag them around
and rotate them and pinch them and zoom them.
So I've got this helper method that's just going to take
an image name which is going to be the name of an image
that we have in our bundle, and a center point
where we want to place that image on the screen.
So we're just going to calculate the rectangle that we want
to end up showing that image in, and create a new instance
of a Touch Image View which we're
going to write in just a minute.
This is a subclass of UIImageView that we're going
to add touch handling to so that it knows how
to rotate itself and translate itself and scale itself.
So we'll set our Image View's image, set its
center point so that we position it on the screen,
add it as a subview of our ViewController's view and release
it because we don't actually need a reference to it anymore.
So now we've got that helper method written.
We're just going to call it three times with three
different images and three different center points.
So let me get a stack of three images down the screen.
So that's all we really have to do on our ViewController.
We've created our views.
And so now, let's go implement touch Image View.
I've already defined two instance variables in the header.
The first is this original transform
which is a CGAffineTransform.
If you're not familiar with this, it's
just a Core Graphics data structure
that can represent a rotation, a scale, and a translation.
So we'll use that to store basically the baseline
transform that we're going to modify as we get touches.
And then we'll also need to store the touch
begin points, 'cause as I mentioned earlier,
UITouch doesn't remember what position
it originally began at.
So if we need that information, which we do here, we're
going to save it off in a mutable dictionary that we'll use
to map the touch instance to the point at which it began.
>> Alright, so in our implementation, not much here yet.
We just have an initializer that's called super
and dalloc to release our touch begin points.
So let's start out by initializing these data members here.
We're going to set our original
transform to the identity transform
which means no scale, no rotation, and no translation.
And we're going to initialize our begin points with the new
CF mutable dictionary that we use to store this mapping.
One other thing that we have to turn on here is the
Multi-Touch and user interaction enabled properties.
So user interaction enabled is by default
YES for UIView but for UIImageView,
it's actually default-- its default value is NO.
So if we don't turn it back on, we'll actually never get
any of the touch delivery methods called on our image view,
so we wouldn't see anything, any touches at all.
And we'll also going to turn on Multiple Touch.
And the default value of Multiple Touch is NO for all views.
So if you need to be able to process multiple
touches, you'll have to turn this back ON
or your touch methods will only ever get one at a time.
Alright, so we've got those two things turned on.
Now we can start to implement the actual
touch handling methods themselves.
So we're going to start out with touchesBegan.
The first thing we want to do is get
the set of touches that were already
in existence before the touches that are beginning now.
So as I mentioned the touch set here that we're getting
and touchesBegan is the set of touches that are beginning
but there may be other touches active in our view right now.
So we can find out about that from the event by asking the
event for all the touches that are currently in our view.
And from that we can subtract out
the ones that are currently beginning
and that leaves us with the ones that were there before.
Now the reason we want to do this is because we're keeping
that original transform which is basically the transform
that we're going to apply an incremental
transform to as we detect new movement.
And every time that we get a new touch starting
or a touch ending, we're going to re-baseline this
so that we have a new original transform to start from
and our incremental transform will be from that point
up until whatever the current movement, set of movement is.
So we've got the touches that were already in existence.
So we'll calculate a new baseline transform from
that and I've got a helper method that does that.
There's a bunch of math here, you can
check it out in the sample code after.
It's basically solving a system of equations,
the calculator rotation and a transform and--
I'm sorry, a rotation, a scale, and
a translation from the touch points.
But we're going to kind of gloss over that at the moment.
So we've re-baselined our transform, we also
want to re-cache the touch begin points.
'Cause now that we've calculated a new baseline
transform, all of our touches are going to be--
sorry, our incremental transform will
be calculated from this new baseline.
So we want new began points for all
of the touches that already existed.
And we're going also cache begin points
for touches that are just starting now.
Alright, so that's touchesBegan.
Now we can do touchesMoved which
is where we're actually going
to calculate any new transforms and apply it to the view.
So we'll start implementing touchesMoved and calculate
this incremental transform I was talking about.
So I've got a helper method that does this as well and
it basically takes the touch begin points that we've got
in our touch begin points dictionary and the current
point of all the touches that we're going to get back
from the event by asking the event for all the touches
in our view, and it'll calculate the rotation, the scale,
and the translation based on the difference between
those points and return that as a new CGAffineTransform
which is the incremental transform
from what we cached as our baseline.
So we can then set our views transform to the concatenation
of our baseline transform plus
this new incremental transform.
So that's began and moved.
Now we'll implement touchesEnded to clean up a touch list.
So we-- as I mentioned we're going to re-baseline
our touches now since the number of touches
in our view is changing and we're going to re-baseline it
based on all the touches that are currently in the view.
And then we're going to remove from the cache any
touches that are ending because we're not going
to be notified about these touches anymore.
They're done and we don't want to end up leaving them in
our touch cache or we'll have some stale data and we'll end
up leaking memory and all matter of bad things.
So we want to clean up our cache by removing those
touches and re-cache any of the remaining touches.
So we're going to do basically the same thing we did in
touchesBegan ask the event for all the touches in our view
and subtract out the ones that are ending
and what we're left with are the ones
that are still going to be active in the view.
So we're going to re-cache any begin points
for those since we've now re-baselined things.
And additionally-- and then we're done
with that touchesEnded, I think [phonetic].
Now as I mentioned touchesCancelled is also a very
important member of this four-member family here.
So we also want to implement that.
Now generally speaking, when you get touchesCancelled,
the idea is that you don't want to perform some action
as a result of receiving touchesCancelled because
some event has happened that has caused the user
to not perform whatever action
they were starting to perform.
In our case, we're just dragging
things around on the screen.
So it's pretty reasonable to just
drop them in place where they were.
So we're actually just going to call
touchesEnded on ourselves to do that.
Now this is fine in this case because we don't
end up calling super touchesEnded up here.
If our touchesEnded implementation actually called
super, this could potentially be a pretty big problem
because our superclass or potentially superview would end up
getting touchesEnded for a touch that's actually cancelled
and then it could get out of sync, it would
not actually know that touch was cancelled.
We wouldn't really want that.
But since we don't call super,
all this code is self-contained.
We're just going to call touchesEnded and
kind of take the cheap way out right now.
Alright, so with all that done, we're just going to build
and run and now we've got a bit of a crash [laughter].
Let's check out what's up there.
[ Audience Remark ]
>> What's that?
>> We get to learn about debugging.
>> Yeah that's,-- yeah, oh hey
we're building against the 2.0 SDK.
That's probably not what I meant.
Oops, I lost the window.
We'll look at this real quick and if it's not obvious we're
going to move on but -- did you look image name center.
It does not exist, eh.
I think it was the SDK that was our problem.
Yeah. Alright, so this time for sure.
We've got this image that we can drag around and we enabled
Multi-Touch support and we're calculating the rotations
and scales so we can put two fingers in one
and we can rotate them around and scale them.
And we can also put two fingers in
different ones and move those around.
[ Pause ]
[ Applause ]
>> Alright, oops, what did I do with my remote?
There you go.
Oh hey, this is the example of what you're going to see.
I hope I didn't ruin it.
Alright, oh and we're going to see a demo.
Alright, so [laughter], now let's talk about
what's new in iPhone OS 3.0 regarding UIEvent.
So we've got a couple of new things here.
We've got a new EventType property.
So there are actually two EventTypes that are possible now.
Everything we talked about so far,
the UIEvent is a touches Event.
It knows about the touches that are
happening on screen and it's being sent to you
to report touches beginning, moving,
ending, or being cancelled.
So that's type UIEventTypeTouches.
But now there's also a new type, UIEventTypeMotion.
And UIEventTypeMotion is used to deliver information
about physical movement of the device to your application.
Jason is going to talk a little bit
more about the specifics of this later.
So we're going to gloss over it at the moment.
There's also this new UIEventSubtype property.
And the subtype is currently either UIEventSubtypeNone
which all UIEventType touches are subtype none
or UIEventSubtypeMotionShake and currently
all motion events are subtype motion shake.
So, you know, pretty easy to know what's going to
happen but do check it out when you're using it
because things could change in the future.
Alright, so we've talked about touches.
We've talked about events and we know what they are and we
kind of saw that, we're getting events delivered to our view
but we didn't really talk about how
we decide what view gets the events.
And things are a little different when
we start talking about motion events.
So let's look at that.
For those of that have been working on
this, you're familiar with UIResponder.
A lot of objects on our system
are sub classes of UIResponder.
UIView is a subclass of UIResponder.
UIViewController is a subclass of UIResponder.
And anything that's a subclass of UIResponder can
implement and receive any of these touchesEvents--
sorry, touch delivery methods that
we were just talking about.
But how do we figure out which object in
your application is the one that gets it?
Well for UIEventType touchesEvents the UIWindow will call
hitTest withEvent on all of its subviews trying to figure
out which one is the one that needs to handle this event.
So the default implementation of this makes sure that
the touch is actually within the frame of the view
and that the view is not hidden that it has an alpha
that doesn't make it fully transparent and if all
of those conditions are met, it
will return itself or possibly one
of its subviews if some subview is also the hit view.
So yeah, sorry, this is recursively called through the view
hierarchy to figure out the deepest view that gets hit.
And the view that gets returned from this, the deepest view
on the view hierarchy, is the one that the touch gets bound
to and all further events for that
touch will be delivered to that view.
But things are slightly different with motion events.
Your finger may not even be on
the screen for a motion event.
If the user is shaking the phone, they
probably don't have a finger down.
We can't just hitTesting to figure
out where we need to deliver that.
So for motion events, we actually
send the event to the first responder.
I'm not really going to talk about this right now.
Jason will cover that later on when he comes up.
But the important thing to remember is that for
touches events, we'll send it to the hitTest view,
and for motion events we'll send it to the first responder.
So what happens after we've delivered it
to the first responder or the hitTest view?
>> Well, we're going to assume for the purposes
of what we're going to talk about right now
that this view here is both our
hitTest View and our FirstResponder.
So it's going to get all motion events and also
the touches events that we're talking about now.
So, we call touchesBegan, Moved,
Ended, and Cancelled on this view.
If this view doesn't handle them, then it will get passed
up the responder chain to that view's ViewController.
And that view's ViewController will have
a chance to look at these touch events.
If the view did handle them, it would not get passed
up the responder chain unless you had called super.
If the ViewController doesn't handle them, it
will get passed up to the view's superview.
If that view doesn't handle it,
its ViewController gets a chance.
If the-- and again, up the view hierarchy-- sorry, up the
responder chain which is equivalent of the view hierarchy
in this case, then over to the, that view's ViewController.
If that ViewController doesn't handle
it, it will go up to the window.
And if the window doesn't handle it, then
the UIApplication object will have a chance.
Now, generally speaking, your application won't
have quite so many ViewControllers imbedded.
So it'll usually look a bit more like this.
But the important part is view to superview
to superview, any view's ViewController
in there will get a chance to get it, window, application.
Alright, so that's the event delivery thing.
Now, you might be thinking here, there's one
view that actually gets to handle these events.
But what if I want to handle something like a
pinch, and the two touches start in different views,
but-and so they're hitTested to different views,
where do I want to put my logic to handle this?
It becomes a little bit tricky and you have to
start trying to coordinate between these views,
and you might end up with some pretty complicated
state machines to track whether you mean move one view,
or a pinch means, you know, scale the whole thing.
It starts to get a little bit tricky and so
let's talk about ways that you can solve that.
By grouping these touches together, and
starting to treat them as more of a gesture
than individual touches in separate views.
So, we've got the basic case.
This is the really easy one, alright?
You've got a single touch and it's happening in one view.
That view has been hitTested.
You put your logic in there to handle
touches and everything's great.
No problem.
We can put that one touch there, drag
around this one view, everything is easy.
It's not even that much harder when we
start talking about Multiple Touches
if those Multiple Touches are in that one view.
We just saw doing this, we can put all that
logic in one view, and it's all pretty easy.
And the same thing with Multiple Touches in
separate views, if what we mean is what we just saw
with those two touches meaning, move those two views around.
But things start to get a little more complicated if
we start wanting those two touches to work together.
And instead of moving those two views, we
want them to actually scale everything.
So, where do we want to put this logic?
Because we still want each individual view to track
one touch in it as an attempt to move that view.
It's just that when two touches come down in
different views, we want to start scaling everything.
So we've talked about these Event Delivery Methods.
We've got touchesBegan, Moved, Ended and Cancelled,
and those are sent to the FirstResponder,
sorry, the hitTest view.
But what we didn't talk about is
where these things get called from.
So UIWindow actually has a method called sendEvent.
And sendEvent is basically the funnel point through which
all of these UIEvents get passed, and sendEvent breaks them
down into their individual touches, it looks and sorts
them by phase and by view and calls the touchesBegan,
Moved and Ended methods on each of the individual views.
And that is in turn, called by UIApplication sendEvent which
passes the event up to whatever window needs to see it.
So we can take advantage of knowing that sendEvent is
this funnel point, and override that to take a look
at all the touches before they're
even delivered to any of the views.
You want to be careful if you're doing this though.
You subclass UIWindow and overwrite sendEvent, it's a great
place to observe touches and watch them as they're going by.
Not a good place to try and control delivery.
The touches are delivered in one event and there may be
touches bound for multiple views and different phases.
If you implemented sendEvent and didn't call super in
certain cases, some views in your application might end
up seeing only a partial touch sequence
and ending up getting out of sequence.
So if you override this, always do call super sendEvent.
Alright, so let's take a look at what we've got now.
This is our current application that we just built, right.
We're going to sketch it out a little bit, got
our UIApplication object and our UIWindow object.
We've got our ViewController's View which is
containing these three separate image views.
So as things are working right now, in what we just wrote,
the UIApplication sendEvent is the
first thing that gets to see this event.
That in turn calls sendEvent on UIWindow.
So sendEvent on UIWindow then breaks these
things out, and calls touchesBegan, Moved,
Ended and Cancelled on all the appropriate
views after filtering the touches
out for what view they're actually bound
to and sends them to the appropriate view.
And that's great for what we were trying to do.
But that doesn't really work so well
for what we're trying to accomplish now.
So, come on.
Yeah, yeah, OK.
You know what, that might be a different game.
Let's skip that for now.
OK, so let's shrink this down now and add another
object next to our touch-- our Image View.
We're going to sort of attach this helper object on the
side, and we're going to call it a transform gesture.
We're actually going to implement all of our
touch handling logic in this separate view.
And now, we can also take the same
object that we're going to define
and also attach one alongside our
ViewController Container View.
But UIApplication and UIWindow isn't going to
know about these separate objects that we have.
You can't hitTest something that's not a view.
So it doesn't know to send any touches to these things.
So we're actually going to subclass
UIWindow and overwrite sendEvent.
So what will happen now is UIApplication sendEvent
will end up calling sendEvent on our UIWindow subclass.
And from there, we can do some filtering ourselves,
and figure out what touches we're interested
in for what location, and pass them to our helper objects.
So our subclass of UIWindow sendEvent is going
to end up calling touchesBegan, Moved, Ended,
and Cancelled on all of our transform gesture objects,
and then all those things will have a chance to look
at whatever touches they're interested in.
Then we're going to call super which will
pass the event back up to UIWindow sendEvent,
and UIWindow sendEvent will just continue to do
the default behavior and call touchesBegan, Moved,
and Ended on the appropriate view
that all the touches are bound to.
So we can look at all the touches before
they even get delivered to the views,
and decide if we want to do something that's going
to be more global than we would have been doing
in the actual touch handling method of the view itself.
Alright, so let's take a look at how we're actually
going to implement this and what it's going to look like.
Alright, so I've got basically the same class
that we had here before, sorry, the same project.
I've made a few small changes already.
We still have the same app delegate, nothing new there.
But now, I've already created this transform
gesture class, and I've added a few things.
So I moved over the same two instance variables
that we had in our Touch Image View before.
So we've still got the original transform
and the touchBegin Points instance variables
but I've added a couple more things.
So we've got another transform
which is the current transform.
So if you remember from a little while ago, in
touchesMoved, we would set the current transform on the view
to the concatenation of the original
transform and the incremental transform.
And basically, the view is storing that
and changing its bounds based on it,
I'm sorry, changing its frame based on it.
But now, we're no longer a subclass of UIView,
this thing is just a subclass of UIResponder,
and UIResponder is a subclass of
NSObject, so we're not a view.
So we don't have a transform property.
So we're going to have to have some place to store this.
So we'll create this new transform instance
variable and define a transform property
so that we can store the actual current transform.
And then, we've got two new things,
we're going to define a target action.
So our transform gesture object that we're about to
write is going to-- every time it updates its transform,
call some action method on a target object
to tell it that this transform has changed.
Additionally, we want to associate this transform
gesture with a particular view so that we can sort
through the touches in the event and
figure out which ones we want to look at.
So we've got that.
We're defining just a couple of accessors
for those things, and additionally,
a new initializer that will set
up our target action and view.
In the actual implementation itself, I've basically just
copied over what we had from the Touch Image View before.
The only other thing I've added is this set
of initializers in initWithTarget to set
up these variables based on what we've passed in.
But still, initializing the original
transform and touch begin points,
the same way we were before, and dealloc still the same.
I defined a few accessors but they just pretty much
returned the instance variables we just created
and I still have the touch handling code,
totally unmodified from what we had in the view.
So we do have to make just a few
changes, but actually nothing too big.
The first one is our touch handling code was before asking
the event for all the touches that were in the view itself,
but we're no longer a subclass of
UIView, so we're no longer a view.
The event doesn't know that there
are any touches bound to us.
So instead, we're going to look
for all of the observed touches.
Now, I have implemented a method on this transform
gesture recognizer already and we're not going to look
at it too much because your logic
for what touches you're interested in
and any particular gesture will
probably be different than mine.
All mine really does is look through all touches
in the event, and find any touches that are bound
to this view or any of this view's subviews.
So that is going to return all of those and we're
just going to replace that in the three other places
where we were calling touches for views self.
So we're always going to get all the
touches in our view or any of our subviews.
>> Oops, this is not cooperating here.
Alright, so, with that done, now
we've got one last change to make.
As I mentioned, every time that our transform is updated,
we're going to call that action method on our target
to let it know that we've updated our transform
so it can perform some action based on that.
So, in our touchesMoved, we're just going to tell our
target to perform the selector action which we saved off
at the beginning with our self being
the object so that it can get back
and find out what the current transform
is that we're saving off here.
We've defined a new transform property
that we're saving in our instance variable
so we don't even have to change
that, we're still good to go.
That's actually the only changes we
have to make to the touch handling code.
Other than that, it can remain exactly the same as what
we had when it was in the touch image view subclass.
So, let's move over to our UI window
subclass, our EventObserverWindow.
I've defined a new instance variable
that is an array of transform gestures.
So, we're going to allocate all of these transform
gestures and associate them with particular views,
but we want to tell the window about them so that it knows
that it needs to send events to all of these objects.
And to do that, we're also going to add two-- sorry, two
methods, the add transform gesture method to add something
to this array and another one to get all the gestures back.
So, our implementation of our subclass view
window right now, I'm loading it from a NIB
so I've implemented a wait from
NIB to allocate our mutable array.
You might also have to implement, excuse me,
initWithFrame if you create your window
programmatically and in dealloc we'll just release that.
So now, we're going to implement those
two methods, the add transform gesture.
It's just going to add the transform gesture passed
in to the array that we have as our instance variable.
And the accessor that returns all of the gestures, we're
just going to create an auto-released copy of that.
So that-- since it's mutable, we
don't want to return the object itself
in case it's mutated and someone
that gets it holds on to it.
And now, we're going to implement our
sendEvent override here in our subclass.
We'll call super but we're not going to do that yet.
We're going to look at all of the touches
before we let our subviews take a look at them.
So, the first thing we're going to do is iterate all of
our transform gestures that we have saved in that array.
So we're going to look at all of those.
And for each gesture, we're going to find out
what touches that gesture is interested in
and we've already defined a method
that knows how to do that.
So, we're going to ask the gesture
for the observed touches for event.
That's the exact same method that we were calling
from within the touch methods on the gesture itself,
and it'll return again, all the touches on that
gesture's view or on that gesture's views subviews.
Alright, so, we've got that.
Now, UIWindow sendEvent normally
handles all of the dispatch for us.
It calls touches Began, Moved, and
Ended after sorting all of the touches.
But since, we're going to be doing this
dispatch to our own objects that aren't
in views, we have to do that sorting our self.
So, we are going to create these four sets to store
off our Began, Moved, and Ended, and Cancelled touches
and then we'll just start sorting all
the touches that we're interested in.
So, we're going to iterate all over the touches
that the gesture told us it wanted to know about.
We are going to switch on their phase and
start putting them into these buckets.
So, for the began touches that are in phase began, if
we haven't yet found one, we're going to create a set
to store them and we'll add that object
to it, and we'll do the same thing
for any touches that are Moved, Ended, or Cancelled.
Now I've got a default here because there is one phase we
didn't really talk about, and that's UITouchPhaseStationary.
So any touch that we've already been telling you about
but that didn't move during the last event cycle,
is going to get put into the stationary phase.
So, it'll still be in the event, and the event will know
about it, but it won't be in any of these four states,
and there's no corresponding touch stationary
UIResponder method to tell you about it with.
So, we're just going to basically drop those on the floor.
The view will be able to find out about them
or the gesture object by checking the event.
And finally, now that we've got these all bucketed
and sorted, we can tell the gesture to run its code.
So we'll call touchesBegan, Moved, Entered
or Cancelled on each of the gestures.
So we're now, iterating over all
the gestures, sorting the touches,
and calling the UIResponder methods
on those things ourselves.
Since they're not actually in the responder chain, they're
just a subclass of UIResponder but have no next responder,
once we deliver them to the gesture, they're pretty
much-- the gesture will either handle them or be done.
So now that we've done that, we can call super sendEvent,
and that will let UIWindow do its default behavior
of sorting the touches as it normally would and sent calling
touchesBegan, Moved, Ended, and Cancelled on all the views
that actually these touches are bound to.
Alight, so now let's go into our ViewController.
This is the exact same ViewController
that we had in the last demo.
It hasn't been changed at all yet.
We're still creating our touch image view and
setting its center in our little helper method here.
Now, the one additional thing we want to do now is start
to allocate one of these transform gestures for each
of the touch image views that we're creating.
So we're going to allocate a new transform gesture
with target self where self is the ViewController.
This is our main-- we only have one ViewController
in these apps so this is the one ViewController.
We're going to set an action method for this gesture that
will get called every time the gesture updates its transform
and we'll call that the handle subview
transform which we'll implement in just a second.
And we're going to say that the view that
we want this gesture to be associated
with is the touch image view that we just allocated.
So with that gesture created, we can then tell the Window--
and I did add one thing, I forgot about that, sorry.
There's a new IB outlet in our ViewController here in the
header which basically just points back to this window.
So we have a pointer in here so that we can
call add transfer in gesture on the window.
And then we'll release the gesture because we don't
need a pointer to it in the ViewController anymore.
The window knows about it and it's going to call things
on it and the gesture will call back on us when necessary.
Alright, so now we've got these gestures
back on each of the subviews so each
of the subviews on that will be able to transforms.
But we also want a global one, one that's
going to be tracking touches on anything
on the ViewController's view or any of the subviews.
So one last thing we're going to do viewDidLoad
[phonetic] is allocate one more transform gesture,
same target our ViewController.
We're going to have a different action method for this one.
It will be handle superview transform and its view
is going to be self.view, the ViewController's view.
So this one is going to see any touches that are bound
to the ViewController's view or any of its subviews.
And again, we're just going to tell the
window to add that transform gesture,
I've auto-released it so it doesn't get leaked,
just kind of put that code on one line there.
Alright, so now we've got the gestures allocated
and we've told them that they have action methods
on our ViewController, but we haven't implemented those yet.
So let's implement these two action methods.
We've got the handle subview transform
and handle superview transform.
So subview is the one that's going to get
called for touches in any of the subviews
and superview for the ViewController's view.
So the first thing we want to do is figure out whether
we should apply the transform as a result of finding
out about it, because the subview is going to
get-- the subview transform is going to get--
we're going to have this action method called even
if there are touches in two different subviews
that we want to actually treat as a global thing.
So I have a helper method I've written that I'm not
going to go into again here because as with the--
some of the other things we've talked about, the
logic in your application may be a bit different.
This is basically where you have
to do your own disambiguation.
You have to decide whether this gesture
is the thing that actually you want to do
or if there's some other gesture object somewhere
that's-- that that is the thing that you--
that you'd rather have handle this particular touch.
So the logic in this is basically, if
there are two touches in different views,
then don't apply the transform for the subview.
Otherwise, we will apply the transform.
So we're going to get the gesture's view and
set its transform to the gesture's transform.
If we've decided not to do that, then we want to
make sure to tell the gesture to re-baseline itself
because we haven't applied the transform to the view but
the gesture still knows about the new incremental transform.
So the touches that moved you want to re-baseline
for where it is now if we haven't applied it.
And we're going to do basically the same thing
in the handle superview transform except there's
a different disambiguation function that I wrote,
that should apply superview transform for gesture.
And this one basically just says, if
there are two touches and if they're
in different views, then do apply the transform.
Otherwise, don't.
And if we've decided that we want to apply that,
we're going to set the ViewController's
views transform to the gesture transform.
And if not, again, we're going to re-baseline the
transform so we'll just tell it to reset itself.
So let's build and run that and I do this every time.
I told Jason before that there's going
to be one error and I forgot it again.
[Laughs] So I forgot-- there was one other
thing that we didn't really talk about.
I didn't write this in the first
demo but it's in the sample code.
And I was going to talk about taking it out and putting
it in the other place and I forget to do it every time.
So let's talk about it now.
touchesEnded on our transform gesture has this leftover
code that we used to have in the transform view itself,
the transform image view, and this
was trying to look for double taps.
And if there were double-- if there was a double tap
in the view, we were going to have that view come
to the foreground so that you could control Z-ordering.
If something was behind another, you could
double tap in it, it would come forward.
But this is no longer a view so it doesn't have a superview.
So we need to actually delete that.
And in fact, I've left that one thing in the
touch image view and it's the only reason
that we still have a UIImageView subclass.
All of the code in our touch image view is gone
and it's over in the transform gesture now.
So touchesBegan, Moved, and Cancelled are empty but we still
do have this one bit in touchesEnded that's going to look
to see if the tap count is greater than
2, and if it is, move itself to the front.
Alright, so this time it's really going to work.
Now, we can take individual views and move them around.
We can put two touches in one view and still
move that around or rotate and scale it.
But now, if we put two touches in different
views, we're going to end up moving all of them.
[ Pause ]
[ Applause]
>> So it's a little bit more interesting over here
because we can put more than two fingers down.
So you can still put two fingers in
an individual view and move it around.
You can put another one down here and move that around.
You can even scale two at the same time.
And two in here still moves everything.
[ Applause]
>> Alright, thanks.
With that I'd like to ask Jason to come up and
talk about some best practices and other things
that he's going to discuss with motion events.
[ Applause]
>> Thanks a lot, Josh.
OK, let's jump in to some best practices.
So Josh talked a little bit about hitTest.
And it's really important that the view that's returned
by hitTest actually handle all of
these touch processing methods.
Now, that doesn't mean that the class that's returned
has to provide implementations for these but somewhere
in the view hierarchy or the class hierarchy for
that view, there needs to be implementations.
So let's look at a couple of examples of this.
Suppose you just subclass from UIView, you've
got a MyView that's a subclass of UIView,
and UIView does not provide implementations
for any of these things.
It inherits UIResponder's implementation of these methods.
And UIResponder's implementation goes up the responder
chain looking for some view that can handle these touches.
So what happens if in your view you-- let's
say you didn't implement touchesEnded,
let's say, you put this in a table view.
Well, we'll start calling touches methods
on that and then when the finger is lifted,
we'll call touchesEnded on your
view but you don't implement it.
It will go up to the responder's
implementation, that will go up the hierarchy
and table view will see this touchesEnded
it never saw before.
And you actually have no idea what
that's going to do with that.
And if it were in the begin you didn't implement,
for example, that would actually cause highlighting
in the table view and then you'd never send
the end and the highlight would get stuck.
So the rule is if you're-- oops.
The rule is if you're doing this, you need
to implement all those touch handling methods
and you should never call super doing that
because that means you don't handle it,
you need to find somebody else that does.
What happens if you subclass some other UI tip thing.
Let's say you subclass UIButton.
Well, UIButton actually already provides
implementations for all of these methods.
So you can safely just implement a subset of
those so you just want it to care about the end.
You can just overwrite touchesEnded and do
whatever additional processing you need to do.
But in this case, you absolutely have to call super.
Otherwise, UIButton wouldn't see the full touch sequence.
And you may leave the button in some inconsistent state.
So let's talk a little bit about touch forwarding.
What happens if you have some big view
and you've got several subviews of that,
and its big view returns itself from hitTest.
Josh talked a little bit about hitTest, and
normally, we find the deepest view and return
that from hitTest, but you can overwrite this, of course.
Your parent view there can overwrite hitTest and always
return itself and that means it gets a chance to process all
of the touches for itself or any of its subviews.
So let's say you've done this and you want to
conditionally forward some of those touches
on to these various subviews based
on some state in your application.
That's all fine to do but you need
to own all of these views.
If you put some UIKit class in there, let's
say, one of these subviews was a button
and you conditionally set some partial touch
string to that, it actually can't handle that.
In fact, no UIKit classes can handle
touches that were not bound to them.
So if the touches view is not the receiving view, you
cannot expect any of the UIKit classes to handle that.
Alright, so let's look at some Gotchas.
As Josh mentioned, this is actually a fairly common error.
We've seen this in a lot of cases.
People who handle touchesBegan, Moved, and Ended but
don't provide an implementation for touchesCancelled
and what happens here is when the touch gets cancelled,
not only does your view not get a chance to process
that potentially leaving your view in some inconsistent
state, but that touchesCancelled is going to go
up the responder chain looking for
some object that can handle it.
Some random view is going to get touchesCancelled
for touch it's never seen before
potentially doing something bad in that view.
So I sort of alluded to this in the previous slide UIKit
classes cannot participate in sort of touch forwarding.
You can't catch a view or catch a touch sequence
in your own view and then just forward it
on to any UIKit class and expect that class to handle that.
[ Pause ]
>> So, if you subclass a various UIKit class
let's say you call, you subclass UIButton
and you conditionally call super for some of the methods.
That means that UIButton won't see the full touch sequence.
Say for example in touchesEnded sometimes you call
super sometime you don't depending on some state.
That means UIButton itself might in some
circumstances never see that touchesEvent
and you can leave that button in some inconsistent state.
So, if you override any of these where the superclass
provides an implementation you absolutely need
to call super.
This is sort of related.
Suppose that in your touchesMoved you decided, well I really
want to cancel this touch so you call super touchesEnded
or touchesCancelled or something like that, even though
you're in a move and the phase of the touchesMoved.
You can't expect that the parent class is going to do the
right thing of that-- with that because it's going to get,
you know, touchesEnded or touchesMoved for a touch
that's in the wrong phase, so you really only need
to call super with the same method that you received.
[Pause] Alright, so let's move on to Motion Events.
We've added this new in 3.0, the new motion
EventType and we've added a new shake Subtype.
So what do you need to do to receive this?
Well, Josh mentioned that you need to
be the FirstResponder to receive those--
I'm sorry, let's set back and talk about
what you-- the methods you have to implement.
There're three methods that you have to implement.
They sort of mirror, the touch methods, there's
a motionBegan, motionEnded and motionCancelled.
And just like the touch methods
you need to implement all of these
and you should not call super from any of these methods.
Calling super does the same thing it does in touch
process and it goes up to responder chain looking
for some object that can process that motion event.
And by default UIApplication actually
provides an implementation
of the motionEnded method to do the undo action.
So, if you called super from this you might do your
action and then also trigger the Undo dialogue to pop up.
Let's also talk about when you get these.
So for shake, when you first start shaking device, sort of
the first moment that the device starts moving we're going
to send the motionBegan to the FirstResponder.
If it's what we detect as a shake so sort of a short series
of rapid movements, we'll send motionEnded and you can,
and we'll say that the subtype of that is shake
and you can do whatever process you need to do.
But if it-- for some reason doesn't look like a shake and
we have some fairly complex logic to analyze that series
of sort of accelerometer movements just,
you know, to determine what a shake is.
Say for example, the thing goes on too
long you, you shake it for quite a while
or for some other reason the pattern that's
emitted looks-- doesn't look like a shake.
We're going to send motionCancelled there.
So, for example the device is in your pocket, you run down a
flight of stairs, the first part of that might actually look
like a shake but if it's gone on too long, so
we will go ahead and sent a cancel in that case.
So if you get the ended that means, we
definitely detected that there's a shake
and you can do whatever process you needed to do.
OK, so now let's talk about FirstResponder.
So, you need to become FirstResponder to receive these
things, and to do that you just send whatever responder
that you want to process the motion
events the becomeFirstResponder message.
And becomeFirstResponder calls another
method called canBecomeFirstResponder to see
if that responder is allowed to
be FirstResponder at that time
So, by default, normal responders return
NO from this method so if you need
to receive motion events you need
to overwrite this and return YES.
Of course, you can do this conditionally if under some
circumstances it's appropriate to become FirstReponder,
in another circumstance it's not, but we'll
just show sort of a simple implementation here.
So, let's modify the demo that Josh built so that we
recognize a shake gesture and when we recognize it,
all the views will sort of animate
back into their original position.
[ Pause ]
>> OK, so there's a few places we could do this.
As we said, you know, views and ViewControllers are all
responders, there are a few places we could put this logic.
We could put it in the individual subviews that
we saw but that doesn't make a lot of sense
because we really want this to
affect all of views on the screen.
And we could put it in that containing view but in this
particular example that's just an instance of UIView.
So to do that, we would have to subclass UIView and change
the NIB which is all fine, that would work just fine,
but remember the ViewController is
also a responder in the responder chain
and that's a fine place to handle these things.
So, that parent view's ViewController
is this Multi Touch demo ViewController.
So, we'll just have this view handle these touches.
So, the first thing we need to do-- Oops, apparently--
[ Pause ]
>> -- pardon me just a second.
>> OK. I have just reopened it.
OK, so the first thing we need to
do is implement View Did Appear.
We know that the View is there and on screen now.
And so now, we can make our ViewController
the FirstResponder.
So we'll call becomeFirstResponder on that.
And then we'll implement the canBecomeFirstResponder method
so that we actually we'll be allowed
to become the FirstResponder.
And now we just need to provide those motion methods.
So, the first is motionBegan withEvent because
we actually are going to be processing these.
We do need to overwrite that and
provide an empty implementation.
If we didn't implement it, it would go up the
responder chain looking for some object to handle that.
Next in motionEnded, this is when we actually
detect the shake, we're going to reset the transform
of the outer view back to the identity transform and
then we're going to go through each of our subviews
and reset their transforms back to the identity transform.
And then we now need to tell the transform
gestures to re-baseline from that point.
So, let's run that.
[ Pause ]
>> Oops. Did the same thing.
We're not on 3.0.
[ Pause ]
>> Alright, we'll move a few things
around and then we'll send a shake event.
Notice everything snaps back.
We didn't put any of the animation code.
Fortunately, we're built on top of Core Animation,
so that's very trivial to add animation code.
We'll just-- oops, I'm sorry, I didn't
implement motionCancelled, look at that
Very important to implement motionCancelled [laughter].
OK, so we will wrap this block of code that
adjusts these transforms in an animation block.
So first, just say began animations.
We can set a duration here, I played with it a
little bit, half a second seems like a nice duration.
And then after we're done with
that, commit those animations.
And that's actually all we need
to do to animate these views back.
[ Pause ]
>> So we move some things around again, new
shake gesture, they animate nicely back.
[ Applause ]
>> If you want any more information, Matt
Drance is the Application Frameworks Evangelist,
and there's some great documentation that
describes all of this stuff up on the site.